# is307 Introduction to Cryptography and Information Security

## acknowledgments
Reference book: *William Stallings - Cryptography and Network Security: Principles and Practice (5th Edition)*


## Lec9 Hash
## Reading the book
A hash function H accepts a variable-length block of data M as input and produces a fixed-size hash value h=H(M).
A good hash function has the property that the results of applying the function to a large set of inputs will produce outputs that are evenly distributed and apparently random.

cryptographic hash function

**preimage and collision** For a hash value $h=H(x)$, $x$ is the preimage of $h$. A collision occurs if we have $x /neq y$ and $H(x)=H(y)$.

Security requirements for cryptographic hash function 
variable input size
fixed output size 
efficiency 
**preimage resistant(one-way property)**
For any given hash value $h$ it is computationally infeasible to find $y$ such that $H(y)=h$
**second preimage resistant (weak collision resistant)**
For any given block $x$, it is computationally infeasible to find $y \neq x$ that $H(x)=H(y)$
**collision resistant (strong collision resistant)**
It is computationally infeasible to find any pair $(x, y)$ such that $H(x)=H(y)$

**preimage resistant**
**preimage resistant (one-way property)** it is easy to generate the hash code from given message but virtually impossible to generate a message from the hash code.
**second preimage resistant (weakly one-way)** it is impossible the find an alternative message with the same hash value as a given message.

### Brute force attack 
**Preimage and second preimage attacks** For an m-bit hash value, the adversary would have to try on average $2^{m-1}$ values of $y$ to find one that generates a given hash value $h$.

### Collision resistant attacks 
For collision resistant attack, and adversary wishes to find two messages or data blocks, x and y that $H(x)=H(y)$. With the result of birthday paradox, we can expect to find two data blocks with the same hash value within $\sqrt{2^m}$

### Cryptanalysis
The ideal hash algorithm will require a cryptanalytic effort greater than or equal to the brute-force effort.

The overall structure of typical secure hash function - iterated hash function. 
The hash function takes an input message and partitions it into $L$ fixed-size blocks of $b$ bits each. If necessary, the final block is padded to $b$ bits. The final block also includes the value of the total length of the input. The inclusion of the length makes the job of opponent more difficult.
IV=$CV_0$=initial value, $CV_i$=chaining variable, $Y_i$=ith input block, f=Compression algorithm, L=Number of input blocks, b=length of block, n=length of hash code.


## slides
HASH FUNCTION
Definition of hash function: from message to hash code 
application: 
- modification detection code (MDC) require: second preimage resistant, also called one-way
- signature. To sign a message M, first h=H(M), then sign hash code h. s=S(H). motivation: can not use redundancy attack. require: collision free 

RANDOM ORACLE
random oracle: random first answer, fixed later asked 
random oracle is not function 
random oracle model(ROM): a proving framework. If a system is security in ROM, we replace the RO with a fixed hash function. This is a flaw.

SECURITY OF HASH FUNCTION 
mentioned two requirement
one-way (second preimage resistance, weakly one-way) fixed target, complexity=$2^m$, 
collision free(collision resistance, strong one-way) arbitrary pair, complexity=$2^{m/2}$
NOTE that as hash function map a large space to a smaller one, there are always collision, the keypoint is 'infeasible'
COMPLEXITY COMPUTATION: basic combinatorics and probability, birthday paradox(not intuitive) 


ITERATED HASH FUNCTION 
Components:
- compress funciton, also called round function, l-bit to m-bit
- initial value: initial hash $H_0$ m-bit 
- message: L blocks of l-bit $m$
- hash code: the final result, m-bit 
- chaining value: intermediate result m-bit

ATTACK (for iterated hash)
- Target attack (2nd preimage attack): given M, $H_0$ find M'
free-start target attack: find H', M' that $Hash(H_0', M)=Hash(H_0, M)$
message chosen attack: find a set $C$(in fact a set that can be partition because of equivalent class theorem) $\forall M \in C, \exists M' \ s.t. Hash(H_0, M)=Hash(H_0, M')$
- Collision attack: given $H_0$, find M, M'
semi free-start collision attack: find $H_0$ M, M', $Hash(H_0,M)=Hash(H_0, M')$
free-start collision attack: find $H_0', M, M'$, $Hash(H_0,M)=Hash(H_0', M')$
Complexity:
$C_{FS-target} \leq C_{target} \leq 2^m$, $C_{FS-collision} \leq C_{semi-FS-collision} \leq C_{collision} \leq 2^{m/2}$
From complexity we have these below relationships
relationship between target and collision attack: target -> collision 
relationship between free-start and usual: security against free-start attack -> security against usual
relationship between compress function and Hash chain: $h$ attack -> $H$ attack, ***chain may be weaker than link***

ATTACK on HASH(chain)
Trival free-start attack: find H_1, don't need to start at first block $Hash(H_0, M_1, M_2)=Hash(H_1, M_2)$
Trival semi free-start attack: find fixed point, still use the given $H_0$
Long-message target attack (n block in the given message)
n block can be used as n choice, any one is broken, we get the collision. So the complexity:
$C_{target}(Hash) \leq 2 \times 2^m/n, \ for \ n \leq 2^{m/2}$
$C_{target}(Hash) \leq 2 \times 2^{m/2}, \ for \ n > 2^{m/2}$

MD-STRENGTHENING 
Taking advantage that M' can have different length from M, one can break hash without break h. (add some prefix!)
Merkle-Damgaard strengthening: let the last block be the length of the original message.
Theorem: against free-start collision attack, Hash-MD is as secure as h. 
We can also say that free-start collision attack on HashMD <=> free-start collision on h.
Collision attack on HashMD implies free-start collision on h. inverse is unknown

Target attack when h is not one-way 
Theorem 3 $C_{target}(HashMD) \leq 2^{m/2}C_{FS-target}(h)^{1/2}$
Proof: given $HashMD(H_0, M_1, M_2, M_3,...)$ and given $H_2$. We use meet-in-the-middle-attack to show that the complexity is only $2^{(m+s)/2}$.
We try $2^{(m+s)/2}$ values of $M_1'$, and forward to compute $2^{(m+s)/2}$ values of $H_1'$. We try $2^{(m-s)/2}$ values of $M_2'$ and backward to compute $2^{(m-s)/2}$ values of $G_1$. Note that here we use $2^s$ complexity to compute each backward. Thus both forward and backward use $2^{(m+s)/2}$. 
With such much $H_1'$ and $G_1$, we get high probability to find collision which means that $HashMD(H_0, M_1', M_2', M_3,...)=HashMD(H_0, M_1, M_2, M_3,...)$

Meet-in-the-middle attack 
Theorem $A,B \subset S$ if $|A||B| \simeq S$, then $P(A \cap B \neq \emptyset) \simeq 1-e^{-1}=0.63$

Issue with MD construction. 
Don't understand why "one collision implies arbitrary many collision"
We can use random collision to generate useful and harmful collision. Document collision with MD. 

HashMD compress function 
free-start collision attacks on HashMD  <=> h 
collision attack on HashMD => free start collisoin of h 
free-start target attack on h => target attack on HashMD 
target attack on HashMD cannot achieve ideal security
Goal: find secure h against free-start collison attack 

Compress functions 
one-way, (m+l)-bit -> m-bit, l=m, 2m, 3m, 4m, ...
current construction - iteration + MD strengthening has some drawback. 
We have Sponge construction - absorbing and squeezing.


## Lec 11 Authentication
**Definition of authentication**: [ISO] The provision of assurance of the claimed identity of an entity.

**Components of authentication**: system: set of users, protocols.
**Process**: 
1. Claim identity - Alice 
2. submit authentication data - A->B:M 
3. Verification by B - M ∈ {Ma, ...} ?
4. Conclusion of B - accept or reject ?
	- If M is cipher of MAC, then U={A,B}, B accepts A because B didn't produce M 
	- If M is signature U={A}
	- B accepts A: A produced the message is sured, but A has sent the message is not sured. (freshness, replay ??)

Authentic message: MAC 
MAC - shared secret key k 
- Send: M, Ck(M)
- verify computed Ck(M) = received Ck(M)
Security of MAC: 
- If the key k is unknown, it is difficult to find a new message with a valid MAC, even if many valid (M, Ck(M)) are known.

Digital signature 
- RSA, ElGamal, DSA(digital signature algorithm)
Different signatures
- blind, undeniable, group, threshold, proxy, attribute

Authentication protocols 
Definition of protocol: A series of specified actions taken by specified 2 or more entities.
A protocol specifies how to use cryptographic primitives(encryption, signature...) to provide security services.

Security 
application, services, protocols, mechanisms, primitives, algorithms, theory

Freshness mechanisms 
authentication checking is not enough - also need means of checking freshness of authentic messages to protect against replays
Two method: use of time-stamps, use of 'nonces' or challenges

Examples:
use time-stamp and encryption: M1 = text2||Ekab(Ta||B||text1)
logical time - counter
e-banking
secure-ID: time and nonces


2 basic elements in authentication protocols
- authentic message 
- freshness of the authentic message 

key-exchange protocol 
session key - authenticity, secrecy, consistency

DH key agreement - man-in-the middle attack 
DH provide no authentication, is also called anonymous key agreement 

ZK - zero knowledge
properties of ZK proofs:
- completeness: prover who knows the secret convinces the verifier with overwhelming probability
- soundness  
- zero knowledge: the proof does not leak any additional information
  



